\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename quip.info
@settitle QuIP Manual
@c %**end of header

@dircategory QuIP - A interpreted system for Quick Image Processing
@direntry
* QuIP: (quip).           Quick Image Processing for unix and iOS.
@end direntry

@paragraphindent 0

@include version.texi

@ifnothtml
@copying
@c Copyright © 2011 National Aeronatics and Space Administration
Copyright 2011 National Aeronatics and Space Administration

QuIP Manual for version @value{VERSION}, generated @value{UPDATED}

@c @quotation
@c Permission is granted to ...
@c @end quotation

@end copying
@end ifnothtml

@titlepage
@title QuIP Manual
@subtitle A system for QUick Image Processing
@subtitle with simple scripts or quips
@author Jeffrey B. Mulligan, NASA Ames Research Center

@c The following two commands
@c start the copyright page.
@page

@include COPYING

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll

@c The NASA web page security scanner doesn't like web page
@c comments that contain the string 'admin' !?

@ifnothtml
@insertcopying
@end ifnothtml

@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents
@c If and when the manual gets too long,
@c we have the option of using @shortcontents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top QuIP User Manual

This manual is for QuIP, version 0.2.

@ifnothtml
@insertcopying
@end ifnothtml

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview              ::  A brief tour of QuIP
* Command Language      ::  Writing scripts in QuIP's command language
* Data Objects          ::  QuIP data objects 
* Expression Language   ::  Writing scripts using QuIP's expression language
* Displaying Images     ::  Displaying images using QuIP viewers
* Image Files           ::  Loading and storing images
* Plotting Data         ::  Using the plotting macros
* Control Panels        ::  Using a GUI to control the program
* Advanced Graphics     ::  Sythesizing images using OpenGL
* Interfacing Hardware  ::  Controlling various hardware devices
* Installing QuIP       ::  Obtaining and installing QuIP
* Index                 ::  Complete index

@detailmenu
@c --- The Detailed Node Listing---
@c 
@c Overview of QuIP
@c * Reporting Bugs:: What to do when you discover a bug.
@c 
@c Writing QuIP scripts
@c * First steps::  A simple sample of QuIP
@c Macros
@c * Predefined macros::  Finding predefined macros
@c * Writing new macros::  Writing your own macros
@c 
@end detailmenu

@end menu

@c CHAPTER 1 - OVERVIEW

@node Overview
@chapter Overview
@cindex chapter, first

QuIP stands for QUick Image Processing, and is also a reference
to its scripting language which allows the user to implement
a variety of useful operations with short fragments of script or "quips."

@menu
* History       ::  Some background about QuIP
* First steps   ::  A simple example QuIP script
@end menu

@node History
@section History
QuIP has been developed continously over a period
of several decades, under a series of flavors of UNIX.
The QuIP interpreter is a front end for a number of libraries;
some of these are system libraries, such as X Windows and OpenGL
for image display, and Motif for GUI widgets.  Other libraries
are distributed as part of the QuIP package, and provide support
for various specialized functions, including support for a variety
of hardware devices, and psychophysical experimentation.
It provides an environment for visual and numerical
computing similar in functionality to Matlab and the like.

The QuIP interpreter has its roots in a simple terminal-based
system to interactively control experiments.  It was designed
to facilitate the interaction and minimize the amount of typing
required of the user.  It only gradually grew into a full-fledged
programming language, and still exhibits various shortcomings.
At various times, switching to another interpreter (such as Tcl)
was considered, but the loss of some of QuIP's unique features
seemed too high a price to pay.  You can be the judge.


@cindex index entry, another

@node First steps
@section First steps

Here we present the simplest possible QuIP script.  Invoke QuIP by typing
'quip' at your command shell prompt.  (QuIP command prompts typically end
with the string '> '; the top level prompt is 'quip> '.)
Characters typed by the user are appear as @kbd{user_input}.

quip>  @kbd{echo "Hello world" @key{RET}} @*
Hello world @*
quip>

If you type this example in, you might notice that after the first 'e' is typed,
the interpreter completes the word 'expressions', but that the
completion disappears as soon as the following 'c' is typed.

Here is a slightly longer version:

quip> @kbd{view @key{RET}} @*
quip/view> @kbd{viewers @key{RET}} @*
quip/view/viewers> @kbd{ new v 300 100 @key{RET}} @*
quip/view/viewers> @kbd{ quit @key{RET}} @*
quip/view> @kbd{ draw v @key{RET}} @*
quip/view/draw> @kbd{ string "Hello world" 20 20 @key{RET}} @*
quip/view/draw> @kbd{ quit @key{RET}} @*
quip/view> @kbd{ quit @key{RET}} @*
quip>

The first command @code{view} causes the interpreter to enter a submenu,
which is reflected in the prompt.  By convention, submenus are exited
with the @code{quit} command.

@c CHAPTER 2 - COMMAND LANGUAGE

@node Command Language
@chapter Command Language
The simplest way to interact with QuIP is via the command language.

@menu
* Interactive Features  ::  Typing directly into QuIP
* Menus			::  Command menus
* Startup		::  QuIP initialization
* Variables             ::  Using script variables
* Macros                ::  Writing and using QuIP macros
@end menu

@node Interactive Features
@section Interactive Features
QuIP has many unique interactive features.

@menu
* Prompts              ::  Prompts and prompt suppression
* Response completion  ::  QuIP's history mechanism
* Input redirection    ::  Changing the input source
* Transcripts          ::  Saving what you type
@end menu

@node Prompts
@subsection Prompts
Prompts and prompt suppression

When QuIP is waiting for user input, a prompt is printed.  Command prompts
typically end in "> ", preceded by a string indicating the menu hierarchy. 
Parameter prompts are typically of the form "Enter <parameter description>: ".

Prompts are only printed when QuIP is starved for input.  So if multiple
commands are entered on a single line, no prompt will be printed before the
second command is read.

The fact that commands prompt for missing arguments
makes them somewhat self-documenting.  If you forget the number or order
of parameters to a given command, you can simply enter it interactively
and note the prompts.  The transcripting facility (LINK) provides
a convenient way of recording the results.

@node Response completion
@subsection Response completion

As you start to type in the name of a command, QuIP will complete the word for you if it can.

@node Input redirection
@subsection Input redirection

You can read the contents of a file by using the '<' builtin command.  The effect is the same
as if you were to type in the contents of the file, with the exception that commands and command
arguments are not added to the respective history lists.

@node Transcripts
@subsection Transcripts

You can save a transcript of your typing for later re-execution.  Usually this is not done
without a bit of editing of the transcript.  A common use of this feature is that you are unsure of
what arguments are required for a particular command,
so you execute it interactively, using the prompts as guides for the arguments.
Transcripting offers an alternative to paper-and-pencil notes concerning the order and types
of arguments.

A transcript file is started using the '>' builtin command.

@node Menus
@section Menus
QuIP's command menus

Commands in QuIP are grouped into menus.  The menu hierarchy
is designed so that all of the commands in a menu can be displayed
on a single screen (i.e., fewer than 20 commands per menu).

@menu
* Displaying the menu  ::  How to display the current menu
* Builtin commands     ::  Commands available from any menu
* Exiting the menu     ::  Returning to the previous menu
@end menu

@node Displaying the menu
@subsection Displaying the menu
How to display the current menu

The commands in the current menu can be shown using the command @code{?}.
This is a builtin command, i.e. it is universally available in any menu.

@node Builtin commands
@subsection Builtin commands
Commands available from any menu

Some commands are so useful that it is desireable to have them available
regardless of the menu context.  These include commands for manipulating
variables, loop control, and file redirection.  The complete list of builtin
commands can be displayed using the @code{??} command.

@menu
* Loop control                  ::  Commands for iteration and conditionals
* Generating output             ::  Printing messages and warnings
* Interacting with the system   ::  OS-specific commands
@end menu

@node Loop control
@subsubsection Loop control

These commands are useful for creating control structures.

If <condition> <command> @*
If <condition> Then <command> Else <command>

When an @code{If} is encountered, the next word is read and interpreted as a boolean
condition using the scalar expression parser.  If the word following the condition is
the reserved word @code{Then}, then three words are read, the second of which must be
the reserved word @code{Else}.

Multi-word commands (or multiple commands) may be executed following
an @code{If} by enclosing the entire group in single or double quotes.
@code{If} commands can be nested, but because the command language does
not use braces for grouping, it is often better to write a macro to encapsulate
the predicate of an @code{If} statement.


do <commands> while <condition>

repeat <count> <commands> end

foreach <varname> ( <wordlist> ) <commands> end

These three forms provide for looping.  After the loop is opened, commands
are read until the closing word is encountered.  Unlike command shells such
as (t)csh, the commands are immediately executed as they are read.  When the loop
is scanned for the first time, the commands are saved to a buffer before each
one is executed.  When the end of the loop is reached, the condition is evaluated,
and when appropriate the stored loop body is pushed back onto the input.

@node Generating output
@subsubsection Generating output
Printing messages and warnings

@node Interacting with the system
@subsubsection Interacting with the system
OS-specific commands

@node Exiting the menu
@subsection Exiting the menu
Returning to the previous menu

By convention, menus are exited using the @code{quit} command.  This command is
not a builtin, it is specified individually for each menu.  Most menus
will use the default menu exit method, but occasionally it is necessary
to perform cleanup actions on menu exit.

@node Startup
@section Startup
QuIP initialization

Before interpreting user input, QuIP attempts to read a startup file.
QuIP looks for a startup file with the same name as by which the program
was invoked, with the .scr (script) extension added.  Thus, the default
startup file is named quip.scr.  Creating links to the QuIP executable
with different names provides a way to produce different behavior on startup
through the use of specialized startup scripts.

QuIP searches for a startup script in the following series of directories:
1)  the current directory;
2)  $QUIPSTARTUPDIR (if defined in the environment);
3)  $HOME/.quip/startup (if it exists);
4)  the macro installation directory (/usr/local/share/quip/macros/startup).

Options 2 and 3 happen only when the user customizes his or her environment
appropriately.  The installation directory used in the last case can
be modified during the configuration process (XREF building).


@node Variables
@section Variables
Using script variables

The QuIP has a set of string variables that have a usage similar to command
interpreters such as bash and csh.

@menu
* The variables submenu    ::  Commands to manipulate variables
* Setting variables        ::  How to set a variable
* Using variables          ::  How to dereference a variable
* Special variables        ::  Variables that are set for you
* Numeric variables        ::  Assigning a number to a variable
* Advanced variable usage  ::  Pushing the limits
@end menu

@node The variables submenu
@subsection The variables submenu
Commands to manipulate variables are found in the variables submenu,
accessed via the @code{variables} builtin command.  The commonly
used functions such as setting a variable are generally invoked via
a macro which hides the descent into the submenu.

From the variables submenu, the @code{list} command lists the names
of all variables.  The @code{find} command lists the names of variables
containing a given text string, while the @code{search} command
lists the names of variables whose values contain a given string.

Other commands are described in the following sections.


@node Setting variables
@subsection Setting variables

Variables are normally set using the @code{Set} macro:

@code{Set <var_name> <value_string>}

Variable names can be made up of alphanumeric characters and the underscore '_'.

By convention, normal variable names begin with an alphabetic character, and
numeric variables are reserved for macro arguments.  This is not strictly enforced,
however.  If a variable with name @code{1} is created and set to a value, then that
will prevent the first macro argument from being accessed.  This is not a good thing.

@node Using variables
@subsection Using variables
Variable expansion is peformed when lines are read.  Variable substitution is triggered
by the dollar sign character @code{$}.  As in the UNIX command shells, variable expansion
is inhibited by enclosing a string in single quotes, and always performed for strings in
double quotes.

Nested quotes can become rather complicated.  It is the outermost set of quotes that matter;
In the following example, the variable will be expanded when the line is first read;
the text interpreted after evaluation of the @code{If} condition will be @code{echo 'John is a minor'}.

Set name John @*
Set age 15 @*
If $age>=18 @*
  Then "echo '$name is an adult'" @*
  Else "echo '$name is a minor'"

On the other hand, the quotes could be switched:

If $age>=18 @*
  Then 'echo "$name is an adult"' @*
  Else 'echo "$name is a minor"'

In this case, the text to be interpreted will be @code{echo "$name is a minor"}.
This difference can become important if such a statement is encountered in a loop in
which the value of the variable changes from one iteration to the next.

Another example where immediate variable expansion must be inhibited is when the variable
may not exist:

If var_exists(test) @*
  Then 'echo "variable test exists and has value = $test"' @*
  Else 'echo "variable test does not exist"'

In this example, the first echo command after the @code{Then} must
be enclosed in single quotes, because all of the text is scanned
and subjected to variable expansion before evaluation of the condition.
Enclosing the first @code{echo} command in double quotes would
generate an undefined variable warning in the case where the
variable does not exist, even though the command will not be executed.
This might be considered a design flaw.

@node Special variables
@subsection Special variables

Some variables are preset by the system.  In particular, command line
arguments given when the program is invoked may be accessed as @code{$argv1},
@code{$argv2}, etc.  The may also be accessed using the abbreviated form used
for macro arguments, e.g. @code{$1}, @code{$2}, etc., but the longer form is
useful inside a macro where the short form accesses the macro arguments.

Scripts may refer to external environment variables, but they are loaded
as needed.  For example, @code{HOME} will not show up on the initial list
of variables, but an attempt to dereference @code{$HOME} will cause the
environment variable @code{HOME} to be imported if it exists.

Other special variables may be set by particular functions.  These are
described in the description of the functions.

@node Numeric variables
@subsection Numeric variables

It is not uncommon to use a variable to hold a numeric value.  The
interpreter functions which fetch numeric arguments to commands process
their arguments through a scalar expression parser, but sometimes we
would like to have the result of the expression evaluation stored in
the variable, instead of the expression.  This is accomplished using
the @code{Assign} macro.  @code{Assign} is like @code{Set} in that it
sets the value of a variable, but it does so after running the value
through the scalar expression parser, and formatting the result
as a number.  For example:

quip> Set pi 4*atan(1) @*
quip> Print pi @*
pi = 4*atan(1) @*
quip> Assign pi 4*atan(1) @*
quip> Print pi @*
pi = 3.141593 @*

Several macros are provided to facilitate the manipulation of numeric variables:

@code{Add_Var <var_name> <number>} @*
@code{Mul_Var <var_name> <number>} @*
@code{Increment <var_name>} @*
@code{Decrement <var_name>} @*

These correspond to the C language operators @code{+=}, @code{*=}, @code{++} and @code{--}, respectively.

@node Advanced variable usage
@subsection Advanced variable usage

Unlike the UNIX command shells, QuIP does not provide for indexing
of variables.  In part, that is because QuIP uses braces for subscripting
data objects, and variables are commonly used to hold the names of
data objects.

QuIP does provide, however, a slightly cumbersome way to do indexing via double indirection:

Set person1 Larry @*
Set person2 Moe @*
Set person3 Curly @*
Set i 1 @*
repeat 3 @*
  Set var_name person$i @*
  echo "Person $i is $$var_name" @*
  Increment i @*
  end @*

@node Macros
@section Macros

A macro is a block of text that is substituted when the macro
name is encountered.  Macros provide one of the primary means
of writing compact programs for QuIP. 

@menu
* Predefined macros::  Finding predefined macros
* Writing new macros::  Writing your own macros
@end menu

@node Predefined macros
@subsection Predefined macros

A number of useful macros are loaded on program startup.  (XREF startup file)
The predefined macros may be displayed by entering the @code{list} command
in the
@code{macros} submenu.


@node Writing new macros
@subsection Writing new macros

While the predefined macros may access to the functionality desired
by a user, most everyone will want to combine these building blocks
to accomplish specific things.  Any group of commands which is repeated
more than once is a candidate for inclusion in a macro.

Macro definitions are begun the the command @code{Define} (which is itself a macro, albeit
a very simple one).  The syntax is as follows:

Define <macro_name> <n_args> [ <prompt_specifications> ] @*
<macro_body> @*
.

The macro body is terminated by a line containing a single period @code{.}.  This is the one case where
white space (or the lack of it) is important:  this period must be on a line by itself with no leading
white space.

The number of prompt specifications must match the number of arguments specified.
Each prompt specification consists of a prompt string (quoted if it contains spaces),
which may be preceded by an optional object type specifier enclosed in brackets @code{<}
and @code{>}.  The purpose of object type specifiers is to enable reponse completion
when a macro is invoked interactively.

@c CHAPTER 3 - DATA OBJECTS

@node Data Objects
@chapter Data Objects

Data objects are blocks of memory containing data, and a small block of meta-data describing
the object.  Data objects can be scalars, vectors, matrices, images, or image sequences.

@menu
* Dimensions             ::  Defining the shapes of objects
* Creating Data Objects  ::  Creating objects from the data submenu
* Subscripting           ::  Subobjects and insets
@end menu

@node Dimensions
@section Dimensions

Data objects can have up to five dimensions.  These are the component
dimension or depth, the row dimension or width, the column dimension or height,
the sequence dimension or number of frames, and hypersequence dimension or number
of sequences.  (Hypersequences were introduced to ease compatibility with file
formats in which color images are stored as a sequence of color component frames;
in this framework, a color image is a 3-frame sequence, thus a color movie is
a hypersequence of 3-frame sequences.)

@node Creating Data Objects
@section Creating Data Objects

Data objects can be created using the commands in the data submenu.


@node Subscripting
@section Subscripting

Subscripting allows the user to reference parts of an object.
For example, if m is a matrix (image) of real numbers,
then m[0] selects the first row of the image, while m@{0@} selects
the first column.



@c CHAPTER 4 - EXPRESSION LANGUAGE

@node Expression Language
@chapter Expression Language
Writing scripts using QuIP's expression language

The command language described in the previous chapter can be cumbersome
when writing complicated image processing operations.  Consider, for example,
synthesizing a floating point sinusoidal grating image, scaling it to the range 0 to 255,
and converting it to byte.  In the command language, we would do it with the
following script:

@samp{
Set h 256 @*
Set w 256 @*
Set period 64 @*
Assign two_pi 8*atan(1) @*
Image f $h $w 1 float @*
Image b $h $w 1 u_byte @*
Ramp2D f 0 $two_pi/$period 0 @*
VSin f f @*
VSAdd f f 1 @*
VSMul f f 255/2 @*
Convert b f}

Here is the exact same thing written using the expression language:

@samp{
expressions @*
  read - @*
  int h=256, w=256; @*
  int period=64; @*
  float two_pi=8*atan(1); @*
  float f[h][w]; @*
  u_byte b[h][w]; @*
  f=ramp2d(0,two_pi/period,0); @*
  b = (sin(f)+1)*255/2; @*
  end @*
  quit}

While the second version is not significantly shorter in terms of characters,
it is arguably easier to read and understand.  In the command language, each
operation is one command, while in the expression language multiple operations
can be packed into a complex vector expression.

@c CHAPTER 5 - DISPLAYING IMAGES

@node Displaying Images
@chapter Displaying Images
Displaying images using QuIP viewers

QuIP provides a simple interface to the X Windows system to enable
display of images.

@menu
* Creating a viewer     ::  Creating a new viewing window
* Loading a viewer      ::  Displaying an image in a viewer
* Manipulating viewers  ::  Repositioning and hiding viewers
@end menu

@node Creating a viewer
@section Creating a viewer
Creating a new viewing window

@node Loading a viewer
@section Loading a viewer
Displaying an image in a viewer

@node Manipulating viewers
@section Manipulating viewers
Repositioning and hiding viewers


@c CHAPTER 6 - IMAGE FILES

@node Image Files
@chapter Image Files
Loading and storing images

@c CHAPTER 7 - PLOTTING DATA

@node Plotting Data
@chapter Plotting Data
Using the plotting macros

@c CHAPTER 8 - CONTROL PANELS

@node Control Panels
@chapter Control Panels
Using a GUI to control the program

@c CHAPTER 9 - ADVANCED GRAPHICS

@node Advanced Graphics
@chapter Advanced Graphics
Sythesizing images using OpenGL


@c CHAPTER 10 - INTERFACING HARDWARE


@node Interfacing Hardware
@chapter Interfacing Hardware

Modules have been written to allow QuIP to control a variety
of hardware devices.  Most of these rely on LINUX drivers.

@menu
* Frame grabbers  ::  Getting images from analog cameras
* Video cameras   ::  Getting images from digital cameras
* Analog I/O      ::  Reading and sending signals
* Serial devices  ::  Devices that communcate via RS232
* Parallel port   ::  Using the PC parallel port
@end menu

@node Frame grabbers
@section Frame grabbers
Getting images from analog cameras.

Support is provided for several frame grabbers.

@menu
* Matrox meteor RGB  ::  Matrox component grabber
* V4L2 devices       ::  Composite grabbers with standard s/w interface
@end menu

@node Matrox meteor RGB
@subsection Matrox meteor RGB
The matrox meteor is an older PCI frame grabber that allows capturing
of RGB images via composite or component signals.  The component inputs
can be used to capture 3 monochrome signals provided that the 3 cameras
are synchronized.

@node V4L2 devices
@subsection V4L2 devices

@menu
* LML BT848     ::  Linux Media Labs PCI 4-channel grabber
* Sensoray 811  ::  Sensoray PCI-E 4-channel grabber
@end menu

@node LML BT848
@subsubsection LML BT848

@node Sensoray 811
@subsubsection Sensoray 811

@node Video cameras
@section Video cameras
Getting images from digital cameras.

@node Analog I/O
@section Analog I/O
Reading & sending signals.

@node Serial devices
@section Serial devices
Devices that communicate via RS232.

@node Parallel port
@section Parallel port
Using the PC parallel port.


@c CHAPTER 11 - INSTALLING QUIP


@node Installing QuIP
@chapter Installing QuIP

This section describes how to build QuIP from the source tarball.

QuIP can be downloaded from:
http://scanpath.arc.nasa.gov/quip


@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

